---
Title: The shining
date: 327941537000
description: The film's central character is Jack Torrance (Nicholson), an aspiring writer and recovering alcoholic who accepts a position as the off-season caretaker of the isolated historic Overlook Hotel in the Colorado Rockies. Wintering over with Jack are his wife, Wendy Torrance (Duvall), and young son, Danny Torrance (Lloyd). Danny is gifted with "the shining", psychic abilities that enable him to see into the hotel's horrific past. The hotel cook, Dick Hallorann (Crothers), also has this ability and is able to communicate with Danny telepathically. The hotel had a previous winter caretaker who went insane and killed his family and himself. After a winter storm leaves the Torrances snowbound, Jack's sanity deteriorates due to the influence of the supernatural forces that inhabit the hotel, placing his wife and son in danger.
---

## Plot

Jack Torrance takes a winter caretaker position at the remote Overlook Hotel in the Rocky Mountains which closes every winter season. Manager Stuart Ullman divulges that a previous caretaker, Charles Grady, killed his family and himself in the hotel.

In Boulder, Jack's son, Danny, has a premonition and seizure. Jack's wife, Wendy, tells the doctor about a past incident where Jack dislocates Danny's shoulder during a drunken rage.

Before leaving for the seasonal break, head chef Dick Hallorann informs Danny of a telepathic ability the two share, which he calls "shining". Hallorann tells Danny the hotel also has a "shine" due to residues from unpleasant past events, and warns him to avoid Room 237.

Danny starts having frightening visions. Meanwhile, Jack's mental health deteriorates; he gets nowhere with his writing, is prone to violent outbursts, and has dreams of killing his family. Danny gets physically bruised after visiting an unlocked Room 237 out of curiosity. Jack encounters a female ghost in the room but blames Danny for self-inflicting the bruises.

Staying sober ever since hurting Danny, Jack is enticed back to drinking by the ghostly bartender Lloyd. Ghostly figures including the butler Delbert Grady began appearing in the Gold Room. Grady informs Jack that Danny has reached out to Hallorann using his "talent", and says that Jack must "correct" his wife and child.

Wendy finds Jack’s manuscript with the same sentences written over and over again. When Jack threatens her life, Wendy knocks him unconscious with a baseball bat and locks him in the kitchen pantry. She and Danny cannot leave due to Jack having sabotaged the hotel's two-way radio and snowcat previously.

Jack is freed by Grady and goes after Wendy and Danny with an axe. Danny escapes outside through the bathroom window. Wendy attacks Jack with a knife when he breaks through the bathroom door. Hallorann, having flown back to Colorado after Danny's telepathic SOS, reaches the hotel in another snowcat. His arrival distracts Jack. Jack ambushes and murders him in the lobby, then pursues Danny into the hedge maze. Wendy runs through the hotel looking for Danny, encountering the hotel’s ghosts and a vision of cascading blood similar to Danny’s premonition.

In the hedge maze, Danny lays a false trail to mislead Jack and hides behind a snowdrift while Jack follows the false trail. Danny and Wendy reunite and leave in Hallorann’s snowcat, leaving Jack to freeze to death in the maze.

## Initial reviews
It opened at first to mixed reviews.[65] Janet Maslin of The New York Times lauded Nicholson's performance and praised the Overlook Hotel as an effective setting for horror, but wrote that "the supernatural story knows frustratingly little rhyme or reason ... Even the film's most startling horrific images seem overbearing and perhaps even irrelevant."[66] Variety was critical, saying, "With everything to work with, ... Kubrick has teamed with jumpy Jack Nicholson to destroy all that was so terrifying about Stephen King's bestseller."[67] A common initial criticism was the slow pacing, which was highly atypical of horror films of the time.[68] Neither Gene Siskel nor Roger Ebert reviewed the film on their television show Sneak Previews when it was first released,[69] but in his review for the Chicago Sun-Times, Ebert complained that it was hard to connect with any of the characters.[70] In his Chicago Tribune review, Siskel gave the film two stars out of four and called it "a crashing disappointment. The biggest surprise is that it contains virtually no thrills. Given Kubrick's world-class reputation, one's immediate reaction is that maybe he was after something other than thrills in the film. If so, it's hard to figure out what."[71] Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times wrote, "There are moments so visually stunning only a Kubrick could pull them off, yet the film is too grandiose to be the jolter that horror pictures are expected to be. Both those expecting significance from Kubrick and those merely looking for a good scare may be equally disappointed."[72] Pauline Kael of The New Yorker stated, "Again and again, the movie leads us to expect something – almost promises it – and then disappoints us."[73] Gary Arnold of The Washington Post wrote, "Stanley Kubrick's production of 'The Shining', a ponderous, lackluster distillation of Stephen King's best-selling novel, looms as the Big Letdown of the new film season. I can't recall a more elaborately ineffective scare movie."[74] It was the only one of Kubrick's last nine films to receive no nominations at all from either the Oscars or Golden Globes, but was nominated for a pair of Razzie Awards, including Worst Director and Worst Actress (Duvall),[75] in the first year that award was given.[76][77][78][79]

Vincent Misiano's review in Ares Magazine concluded with, "The Shining lays open to view all the devices of horror and suspense – endless eerie music, odd camera angles, a soundtrack of interminably pounding heart, hatchets and hunts. The result is shallow, self-conscious and dull. Read the book."[80]

## Box office
The Shining opened the same weekend as The Empire Strikes Back but was only released on 10 screens and grossed $622,337 for the 4-day weekend, the third highest-grossing opening weekend from fewer than 50 screens of all time, behind Star Wars (1977) and The Rose (1979).[40] It had a per-screen average gross of $62,234 compared to $50,919 for The Empire Strikes Back from 126 screens.[81] After expanding, the film gained momentum, eventually doing well commercially during the summer of 1980 and making Warner Bros. a profit.[citation needed]
